Dear All,

First of all, I will like to stress that whatever the programmers for
SPM do is entirely up to them and I respect that. And as someone who has
to write conversion routines from SPM to other software, I will have to
accommodate whatever changes you made to the format. However, I feel
that it is my responsibility to highlight possible implication of your
customization. As a user of SPM, I would like to suggest some
modification to it.

(1) The most serious implication is copyright. Analyze format is created
by Mayo Clinic and I therefore assumes that they are the copyright
holder. I am not aware they renounce any copyright or patent on the
format. I am only aware that they published information on how to use
their fileformat. Even this is restricted to Analyze 7.5 and not Analyze
AVW. At present, they may not be demanding any royalties from anyone. It
is also important to note that there is nothing at present to indicate
that they will change this policy. The popularity of SPM is in such a
way that I am sure they are aware of its existance and could actually
see their relationship with SPM as a mutually beneficial one.

However, it is my opinion that they value this relationship provided
that SPM, or any other software, *does not significantly modify the file
format in such a way that the derivative will create problems with thier
own Analyze software, past, present and future*. (Pardon me for using
technical jargon here). SPM99's modification of analyze format is small
and inconsequential. However, based on my observation on spm_read_vol.m,
it is my humble opinion that the same cannot be said to be true with
spm2b and that it can be in conflict with Mayo Clinic's vision for
Analyze format and they may not take it lightly.

In SPM2B, as I read it, the header file is extended by multiples of 516
bytes (512 bytes? see (4)). The key to accessing them is to check
(i)hdr file is > 348 bytes
(ii)First 4 bytes after the 348 bytes should give an int32 value of 20020417
(iii)Read in hdr.dime.dim[5] to deduces number of blocks available and
read in the block.

The contentious point is (i) which may cause friction with Mayo Clinic:
Imagine the situation that Mayo Clinic extended the header file in a way
that conflict with what spm2b did. Then, it is easy to envisage that
that Mayo Clinic is going to experience a flood of support call
complaining that Analyze program cannot read SPM-generated Analyze
format. This failure could be as simple as Analyze program reporting
error in reading the file, Analyze program crashing or in worst case,
their program simply give the wrong results. Now, put yourself in Mayo
Clinic's shoe, what would you do? Would you  (1) rewrite your file
accessing routines, forgoing all your investment in the file format, or
just simply, (2) send a so-called "cease and decease" letter to the
creator/programmer of the "offending program", threatening them with
legal action on copyright infringement should they continue to use the
unauthorized modified format? Mayo Clinic knows that you will want to
avoid the problem of litigation because of the effort and cost involved
so they might exercise this trumph card.

The fact that Mayo Clinic does not publish details of AVW should be
viewed as their declaration want to keep analyze format proprietory. On
this account, I advise caution on modifying their file format.


(2) The values in hdr.dime.dim[6] and [7] are set to 1
(spm_write_vol.m). I think this is better set at 0 instead: (1)0 is the
de-facto computing standard for saying a field is not-in-use, (2) in
future, you can use non-zero values to indicate whatever things you want.

(3) (very minor point) setting spmf(j).mat as a string of 16 'double'
value to store orentation looks like a over-kill because we don't need
that precision. Using 'float' should be sufficient.

(4)I am not sure whether the magic number will be repeated every block.
I intuition is it is not since this leave every block in 512 bytes (516
bytes with magic number repeated). If so, can I suggest changing the
magic number into majic string? To save "20020417" as a string do mean
an extra 4 bytes of disk space but it also mean it is unlikely that any
other software generate the number by chance. I am actually going a bit
further to suggest prefixing the number by the string "spm" to indicate,
clearly and proudly, that this is SPM modification of the Analyze
format. Moreover, it means that if I am not sure whether the file is
SPM-customized version or not, I only need to fire up my Hex editor and
look for the string "spm20020417" or equivalent. It is not possible to
do so if the number is stored as integer.

(5) According to 2(iii), dime.dim[5] is used to indicate how many blocks
to read in read_spmf. I suggest that, assuming the magic number is not
repeated every block, declare a short int after the magic number to
store this value instead. The increase in diskspace is negligible, and
it preserves Mayo Clinic's original intention for using the field to
store the 5th dimension. Although I have to say, I do not see a real
need for the fifth dimension in imaging.

Best regards,
Cinly
